Human Resources (HR)
By WILL KENTON Updated June 24, 2022
Reviewed by JULIUS MANSA
Fact checked by AMANDA BELLUCCO-CHATHAM
What Is Human Resources (HR)?
Human resources (HR) is the division of a business that is charged with finding, screening, recruiting, and training job applicants. It also administers employee-benefit programs.

HR plays a key role in helping companies deal with a fast-changing business environment and a greater demand for quality employees in the 21st century.

John R. Commons, an American institutional economist, first coined the term human resource in his book The Distribution of Wealth, published in 1893. However, it was not until the 20th century that HR departments were formally developed and tasked with addressing misunderstandings between employees and their employers.

KEY TAKEAWAYS
Human resources (HR) is the division of a business responsible for finding, screening, recruiting, and training job applicants.
HR also administers employee-benefit programs.
A human resources department also handles compensation and benefits, and employee terminations.
It must keep up to date with any laws that may affect the company and its employees.
Many companies have moved traditional HR administrative duties such as payroll and benefits to outside vendors.
Understanding Human Resources (HR)
An HR department is an essential component of any business, regardless of an organization's size. It is tasked with maximizing employee productivity and protecting the company from any issues that may arise within the workforce.

HR responsibilities include compensation and benefits, recruitment, firing, and keeping up to date with any laws that may affect the company and its employees.

Key HR Activities
Research conducted by The Conference Board, a member-driven economic think tank, found six key, people-related activities that HR must effectively do to add value to a company. They are:

Managing and using people effectively
Tying performance appraisal and compensation to competencies
Developing competencies that enhance individual and organizational performance
Increasing the innovation, creativity, and flexibility necessary to enhance competitiveness
Applying new approaches to work process design, succession planning, career development, and inter-organizational mobility
Managing the implementation and integration of technology through improved staffing, training, and communication with employees
1

HR Management Strategies
Beginning in the 1980s, there was a push for strategic initiatives within HR departments. This movement was based on research related to the impact of employee-related issues on a firm's long-term business success.

Collectively, these strategies are sometimes referred to as human resource management (HRM) strategies. HRM is a comprehensive approach to managing employees and an organization's culture and environment. It focuses on the recruitment, management, and general direction of the people who work in an organization.

An HR department that adopts HRM strategies typically plays a more active role in improving an organization’s workforce. It may recommend processes, approaches, and business solutions to management.

Google is one example of an organization that has adopted a more active approach to employee relations through its HR department. The company offers many employee perks. The company headquarters has a wide range of facilities for employees, including wellness centers, roller hockey rinks, and horseshoe pits. For Google, happy employees are equivalent to productive employees.
2


In 1901, The National Cash Register Company, known today as NCR Corporation, established a personnel department (the HR predecessor) to manage wages, workplace safety, and employee concerns.
3

Special Considerations
Since the mid-20th century, some companies have been outsourcing certain of the more traditional administrative, transactional HR functions in an effort to free the department to recommend and implement more meaningful, value-adding programs that impact the business in positive ways.
4

Functions that may be outsourced in this process include payroll administration, employee benefits, recruitment, background checks, exit interviews, risk management, dispute resolution, safety inspection, and office policies.

The use of modern tools, such as recruitment software, can help to improve the efficiency of HR departments. In turn, that can give them more leeway to focus on adding ever-greater value.

What Is the Role of Human Resources?
A human resources department is focused on the recruiting and retention of employees within a company. HR typically finds, hires (and fires), and trains employees. It oversees employee relations. It manages benefit programs. It's the place an employee goes with questions about their position at the company, to address concerns, and to air grievances.

What Is Human Resources Management (HRM)?
HRM is a strategic approach to managing company employees, the work culture, and the work environment so that people can function as effectively and productively as possible. Typically, it involves using metrics to measure workforce success.

What Are the 5 Types of Human Resources?
There are numerous, important human resources functions carried out by an HR Department. Five well-known types of these responsibilities could include:

Recruiting, hiring, and onboarding new employees
Handling employee compensation and benefits
Offering employee job/career development
Addressing work-related issues of individual employees
Developing policies that affect a working environment company-wide
Human resources is used to describe both the people who work for a company or organization and the department responsible for managing all matters related to employees, who collectively represent one of the most valuable resources in any businesses or organization. The term human resources was first coined in the 1960s when the value of labor relations began to garner attention and when notions such as motivation, organizational behavior, and selection assessments began to take shape in all types of work settings.

Human resource management is a contemporary, umbrella term used to describe the management and development of employees in an organization. Also called personnel or talent management (although these terms are a bit antiquated), human resource management involves overseeing all things related to managing an organization’s human capital.

Human resource management is therefore focused on a number of major areas, including:

Recruiting and staffing
Compensation and benefits
Training and learning
Labor and employee relations
Organization development
Due to the many areas of human resource management, it is typical for professionals in this field to possess specific expertise in one or more areas. Just a few of the related career titles for HR professionals include:

Training development specialist
HR manager
Benefits specialist
Human resource generalist
Employment services manager
Compensation and job analysis specialist
Training and development manager
Recruiter
Benefits counselor
Personnel analyst
FIND SCHOOLS
Sponsored Content
A Closer Look at Human Resource Management
Human resource management involves developing and administering programs that are designed to increase the effectiveness of an organization or business. It includes the entire spectrum of creating, managing, and cultivating the employer-employee relationship.

For most organizations, agencies, and businesses, the human resources department is responsible for:

Managing job recruitment, selection, and promotion
Developing and overseeing employee benefits and wellness programs
Developing, promoting, and enforcing personnel policies
Promoting employee career development and job training
Providing orientation programs for new hires
Providing guidance regarding disciplinary actions
Serving as a primary contact for work-site injuries or accidents
Human resource management is about:

Addressing current employee concerns: Unlike company managers who oversee the day-to-day work of employees, HR departments deal with employee concerns such as benefits, pay, employee investments, pension plans, and training. Their work may also include settling conflicts between employees or between employees and their managers.

Acquiring new employees: The human resource management team recruits potential employees, oversees the hiring process (background checks, drug testing, etc.), and provides new employee orientation.

Managing the employee separation process: The HR management team must complete a specific set of tasks if an employee quits, is fired, or is laid off. Paperwork must be completed to ensure that the process was completed legally. Severance pay may be offered or negotiated, benefits must be settled, and access to company resources must be severed via the collection of keys, badges, computers, or sensitive materials from the employee.

Improving morale: Effective HR teams encourage company employees to do their best, which contributes to the overall success of the company. Their work often involves rewarding employees for good performance and creating a positive work environment.

The Changing Shape of Human Resource Management
Human resource management involves both strategic and comprehensive approaches to managing people, as well as workplace culture and environment.

The role of human resources professionals is to ensure that a company’s most important asset—its human capital—is being nurtured and supported through the creation and management of programs, policies, and procedures, and by fostering a positive work environment through effective employee-employer relations.

The concept behind human resource management is that employees who are subject to effective human resource management are able to more effectively and productively contribute to a company’s overall direction, thereby ensuring that company goals and objectives are accomplished.

Today’s human resource management team is responsible for much more than traditional personnel or administrative tasks. Instead, members of a human resource management team are more focused on adding value to the strategic utilization of employees and ensuring that employee programs are impacting the business in positive and measurable ways.

An August 2014 Forbes article explored the shifting goal of today’s human resource management teams. More specifically, the article found that HR teams focused on things that don’t add true value to the organization are often deemed reactive, uncreative, and lacking basic business understanding. On the other hand, HR professionals who want to be recognized as true business partners must see themselves as business people who specialize in HR, not as HR people who advise a business.

Todays’ human resources managers/business partners must understand the workings of the business and be able to comfortably speak the language of business leaders in order to have a measured and proven impact on business objectives.